Research is about proposing interesting questions, or identifying important real-world problems, and then exploring the implications of those questions or those problems. Along the way, you may happen to write some code. Indeed, if you do systems research, you’ll probably write a lot of code. However, the code is generally not the most interesting thing—the most interesting thing is the problem that you decided to attack, and the solution that you devised.

It’s difficult to learn how to ask good questions. One reason is that good questions often require a strong understanding of the preexisting scientific literature, and none of us are born with that knowledge. This problem gets better with time, assuming that you keep track of the latest results in your field. A more tricky obstacle to asking good questions is that you have to adopt a philosophical perspective that is a bit unnatural. You have to be able to ignore superfluous details and be able to distill the essence of current solutions; what’s good about them, and what’s bad? You have to be able to relentlessly discard your own ideas if you find them to be lacking, and you have to frequently question your ideas even if they seem good. You also have to be able to figure out ways to actually answer the questions that you posed. This is trickier than it might seem, since the world makes it difficult to prove things :-).

So, learning how to pose questions (and then answer them in a convincing manner) has been the biggest intellectual challenge that I’ve experienced in my career as a researcher. I’ve been lucky to work with brilliant minds at MSR and MIT, and I’m extremely grateful for that. As I mentioned in an answer to another question, the greatest thing that you can do for your intellectual growth is to expose yourself to people who are smarter than you, and who will engage you and challenge your ideas. It’s painful, but it’s worthwhile.

With respect to challenges that arose from being a member of an underrepresented group, I think that there were two main challenges. First, I had to shed the self-consciousness of being in meetings where I would be the only person of color. Second, I had to ensure that, at those meetings, my voice was heard. To do the latter, I did my homework: I always came to meetings prepared; I read books about body language and how to make effective presentations; and, in situations where I thought that I was being unfairly talked-over, I made a personal policy that I would firmly (but politely) insist that I needed to finish what I was saying. By learning how to stand up for myself in meetings and communicate effectively, I was able to get rid of the self-consciousness, since those feelings only emerged when I felt like I was not being an active member of the group.

Thanks for the question---it’s an interesting one! I think that computer science is pretty amenable to independent research. If you have a laptop or desktop, you can develop and test code; if you have access to Azure or EC2, you can run distributed experiments. Many computer science conferences have double-blind reviewing, meaning that, if you submit a research paper, nobody will know that you lack traditional research credentials. Source repositories like GitHub also make it easy to share your code with others. So, there are a lot of ways to get your results to the public. You asked “if this is so easy, why aren’t more people doing it?” The answer is that doing research is not easy, even if it’s relatively easy to get access to the tools :-).

Despite the existence of things like GitHub and EC2, it’s true that the vast majority of basic research is done by universities and industrial labs, not by individuals. I think that there are several reasons for this. First, there are network effects to doing basic research alongside other basic researchers---the cross-pollination of ideas is a force multiplier. Second, there’s a formal aspect to doing research. For example, identifying good research problems is a skill that must be learned and practiced. As another example, there are best practices for running experiments that prove what you want them to prove. PhD programs try to teach those skills, and basic research often emerges from groups of people with PhDs. So, depending on what kind of career you want, working in a university or industrial research lab may be your best bet for getting paid to do basic research.


My favorite part of grad school was expanding my intellectual horizons, not just with respect to computer science, but with respect to sociology, anthropology, philosophy, and all kinds of different fields. Some of my favorite grad school memories come from discussions with friends about topics that had nothing to do with computer science, or that involved computer science in relation to some other field. Being born and raised in Georgia, a lot of my viewpoints before grad school were well-intentioned but, how shall we say it?—a bit provincial. I really enjoyed hearing the perspectives of people from different departments, different socioeconomic backgrounds, and different places in the world. I encourage students in school at any level to talk to as many people as you possibly can. I encourage people who are not in school at any level to talk to as many people as possible. In the end, the only thing that matters in this world are the people in it, and the connections that they have with each other. That is almost certainly a lyric from an emo song, but sometimes you have to put on your dark mascara and cry like a man.
